[Doc] Update differentiable programming doc. (#2993)
taichi-dev/taichi: docs/lang/articles/advanced/differentiable_programming.md

# Differentiable programming

## Introduction

> Differential programming has been proved to be useful in a wide variety of areas

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Differentiable programming has been proved to be useful in a wide variety of areas
```

    y[None] = ti.sin(x[None])
```

> Now if you want to get the derivative of `y` corresponding to `x`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now if you want to get the derivative of `y` with respect to `x`:
```
IIRC "with respect to" is the common mathematical language to describe differentiation.

    y[None] = ti.sin(x[None])
```

Now if you want to get the derivative of `y` with respect to `x`:
`dy/dx`, it's straightforward to write out the gradient kernel manually:

```python {4-6}
x = ti.field(dtype=ti.f32, shape=())
y = ti.field(dtype=ti.f32, shape=())
dy_dx = ti.field(dtype=ti.f32, shape=())

@ti.kernel
def compute_dy_dx():
    dy_dx[None] = ti.cos(x[None])
```

However, as you make a change to `compute_y`, you will have to rework the gradient formula

> by hand and update `compute_dy_dx` accordingly. Apparently when

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
by hand and update `compute_dy_dx` accordingly. Apparently, when
```

with ti.Tape(y):
    compute_y()

print('dy/dx =', x.grad[None], ' at x =', x[None])
```
### Case study: gravity simulation

A common problem in physical simulation is that it's usually easy to compute

> energy but hard to compute force on every particle. Recall that we can differentiate

Reviewer: Some compelling examples on this point for reference:
- [FEM with Lagrangian forces](https://github.com/taichi-dev/taichi/blob/master/examples/simulation/fem128.py)
- [Bond bending (and torsion) in molecular dynamics](https://github.com/victoriacity/taichimd/blob/5a44841cc8dfe5eb97de51f1d46f1bede1cc9936/taichimd/interaction.py#L190-L220)

:::tip
See
[examples/simulation/mpm_lagrangian_forces.py](https://github.com/taichi-dev/taichi/blob/master/examples/simulation/mpm_lagrangian_forces.py)
and
[examples/simulation/fem99.py](https://github.com/taichi-dev/taichi/blob/master/examples/simulation/fem99.py)
for examples on using autodiff for MPM and FEM.
:::

## Using `kernel.grad()`

> As mentioned above, `ti.Tape()` can only track a 0D field as output variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned above, `ti.Tape()` can only track a 0D field as the output variable.
```

If there're multiple output variables that you want to back-propagate
gradients to inputs, `kernel.grad()` should be used instead of `ti.Tape()`.

```python {13-14}
import taichi as ti
ti.init()

N = 16

x = ti.field(dtype=ti.f32, shape=N, needs_grad=True)
loss = ti.field(dtype=ti.f32, shape=(), needs_grad=True)
loss2 = ti.field(dtype=ti.f32, shape=(), needs_grad=True)

@ti.kernel
def func():
    for i in x:
       loss[None] += x[i] ** 2
       loss2[None] += x[i]

for i in range(N):
    x[i] = i
loss.grad[None] = 1
loss2.grad[None] = 1

func()
func.grad()
for i in range(N):
    assert x.grad[i] == i * 2 + 1
```

:::tip
It might be tedious to write out `need_grad=True` for every input in a complicated use case.
Alternatively Taichi provides `ti.root.lazy_grad()` API that can automatically place the

> adjoint fields following the layout of their primal fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gradient fields following the layout of their primal fields.
```
"Gradient" may be a better choice over the mathematically more accurate "adjoint" if we don't expect most readers have backgrounds in automatic differentiation paradigms.

:::

:::caution

> When using `kernel.grad()`, it's recommended to always run forward kernel before backward, e.g. `kernel(); kernel.grad()`. If global fields used in the derivative calculation get mutated in the forward, skipping

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using `kernel.grad()`, it's recommended to always run forward kernel before backward, e.g. `kernel(); kernel.grad()`. If global fields used in the derivative calculation get mutated in the forward run, skipping
```

Alternatively Taichi provides `ti.root.lazy_grad()` API that can automatically place the
gradient fields following the layout of their primal fields.
:::

:::caution
When using `kernel.grad()`, it's recommended to always run forward kernel before backward, e.g. `kernel(); kernel.grad()`. If global fields used in the derivative calculation get mutated in the forward run, skipping
`kernel()` breaks global data access rule #1 below and might produce incorrect gradients.
:::

## Limitations of Taichi autodiff system

Unlike tools such as TensorFlow where **immutable** output buffers are
generated, the **imperative** programming paradigm adopted in Taichi
allows programmers to freely modify global fields.

To make automatic differentiation well-defined under this setting, the following
rules are enforced when writing differentiable programs in Taichi:

### Global Data Access Rules

Currently Taichi's autodiff implementation doesn't save intermediate results of global fields which might be used in the backward pass. Therefore mutation is forbidden once you've read from a global field.

:::note Global Data Access Rule #1

> Once you read an element in global field, it cannot be mutated anymore.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you read an element in a field, the element cannot be mutated anymore.
```

and [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z1xvAZve9aE) to learn more
about Taichi differentiable programming.
:::

> 7

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
